[Music]
thank you Angela uh for the opportunity
uh to speak this afternoon um I will
first would like to apologize for any
redundancies with the beginning of my
presentations with what you just saw
from uh Dr champ and the excellent
presentations we saw earlier in the
conference uh but I would like to speak
briefly on the specific aspects of
cancer metabolism that have shown
efficacy in targeting um espcially
looking at exploiting oxidative stress
as a therapeutic strategy and as an
extension of that uh present some of the
work from my dissertation project in
which I'm evaluating a therapeutic
combination of Doro acetate and
Metformin as a
potential anti-cancer
therapy um so as has been discussed
extensively many cancers exhibit a
metabolic phenotype that's character
characterized by the
preferential uh use of glucose as the
hexo substrate for glycolic metabolism
and the generation of pyruvate which in
normal non and quient cells is generally
transported into the mitochondria for
further metabolism generation of acetyl
COA for the TCA cycle however in cancer
uh the py is predominantly generated or
converted to lactate exported rapidly
from the cell and causes an
acidification of the micro
environment
specifically uh Dr uh the de badinas
group at UT Southwestern showed in a
model of Cleo blastoma that up to 85% of
pyate is actually converted to lactate
and only about 5% actually makes it into
the
mitochondria the remaining fraction of
glucose carbon doesn't often make it uh
into to pyate rather it is shuttled off
into biosynthetic branches from
glycolysis uh for instance glucose 6
phosphate enters the pyruvate or the
pentos phosphate pathway for the
generation of ribos used in nucleotide
synthesis uh along correspond or along
with the generation of
NPH three
phosphoglycerate is the primary
substrate for Serene and glycine syn
biosynthesis which is essential for the
generation of glutathione
as well as adds to nucleotide synthesis
um this increase in biosynthetic
metabolism scening cancer is mediated uh
in part by uh the expression of the M2
isopor of pyic kinas which unlike the M1
isopor is subject to tyrosine
phosphorilation which inhibits uh its
efficiency and leads to a buildup of
glycolytic intermediates Upstream of of
the
enzyme with the accumulation of
knowledge uh in regards to cancer
metabolism has become has come with
great interest in identifying potential
uh small molecule inhibitors for the
various um enzymes within these Pathways
including the oops excuse
me the traditional glycolic Inhibitors 2
deoxy glucose and three bromopyruvate
as well as other uh experimental agents
such as wzb 117 which is a glute one
inhibitor and shows efficacy in reducing
uh tumor growth both in vitro and Vivo
um through the reduction of glucose
uptake astrazenica is uh studying a
molecule a
3965 it's a mct1 inhibitor um and is
shown to uh inhibit tumor growth through
the
inhibiting lactate export from the cell
additionally AIO Pharmaceuticals are
currently uh re researching two uh
separate compounds that inhibit two
isoforms of mutant isocitrate
dehydrogenase um they're currently
recruiting for three separate clinical
trials um these Inhibitors show a
remarkable uh efficacy in reducing um
circulating levels of 2hg which is the
Yom metabolite that was mentioned
earlier in the
conference additionally Nimbus
Therapeutics is interested in a uh
experimental compound ND
646 uh which Ruben Shaw at the sulk
Institute is currently investigating it
is an ACC inhibitor um and has shown
efficacy and reducing tumor growth uh
due to an inhibition of fatty acid
synthesis um another incredible H
Hallmark of cancer metabolism is the
inherent increased basil production of
reactive oxygen species uh this enhanced
Ross is shown or promotes genomic
instability is involved in signaling uh
specifically hydrogen
peroxide activates the mapkinase pathway
inhib and inhibits P10 through protein
oxidation um and it also is involved in
Invasion and metastasis as Matrix metall
proteases are activated um by
Ross as has been mentioned uh with this
increase in basil Ross production is you
get a compensatory enhancement of the
antioxidant capacity hydrogen peroxide
itself stimulates Nerf 2 expression and
activity uh and we I as I mentioned
earlier you get nadph and glutathione uh
synthesis as a byproduct of um glycolic
metabolism additionally this increase in
antioxid capacity is shown to confer
chemo resistance especially in cancer
stem stem cells which seem to exhibit
even greater antioxidant capacity
compared to neighboring tumor cells um
however this uh balance between
oxidative stress and antioxidant
capacity is shown to be a therapeutic
vulnerability uh greeny at all depict
that as a cancer becomes more aggressive
they become more susceptible to small
modulations and oxidative stress stress
ultimately leading to cell
death um for for instance and on the
model we use we show that with the
addition of the antioxidant and acetyl
cysteine you get a reduction in cell
death whereas if you add the glutathione
synthesis inhibitor beine
sulfoximine uh you get an increase in
cell
death um as such with this therapeutic
vulnerability there have been a number
of compounds experimental compounds
under under development among those are
AR q501 which is a quone quinone
derivative that stimulates Ross
production specifically in cells that
overexpress
nqo1 alcol is a copper keator that
preferentially accumulates within the
mitochondria due to its positive charge
um and rapidly induces reactive oxygen
species production finally phenethyl ISO
isothiocyanate um disrupts the
glutathione antioxidant system it forms
conjugants with reduced glutathione uh
promoting its uh export from the cell
this ultimately leads to an increase in
oxidative
stress um our lab is interested in uh
another um small molecule that has shown
to uh induced oxidative stress that
being dor acetate or DCA DCA is a
pyruvate mimetic um that is the
inhibitor of pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinas which is responsible for the
inhibitory phosphorilation of the PD
complex inhibition of pdk promotes
glucose
oxidation therefore DCA is used
clinically in the treatment of
mitochondrial disorders that are
associated with lactic acidosis and DCA
is currently uh under clinical
investigation as an adant to a number of
chemotherapies um as it further induces
oxidative
stress um in the context of cancer we
see the inhibition of the PD compx due
to higher expression and activity of pdk
this ultimately leads to or helps
facilitate the generation of lactate
from pyruvate and and the
cytool uh whereas in the presence of DCA
you get inhibition of pdk you get pyate
flux to the mondria increasing aceto
acetyl COA production which is used in
the TCA
cycle uh within the TCA cycle you get
the generation of reduction equivalents
which are then uh oxidized by the the
protein components of the electron
transport chain uh associated with the
generation of a membrane potential with
the movement of protons across the
membrane ultimately leading to the
generation of ATP however again in the
context of cancer where we see
mon conu dysfunction um we see an
inefficient transfer of
electrons between these complexes and
the premature loss uh of electrons which
interact with molecular oxygen to
generate superoxide which can then
promote uh protein oxidation loss of
membrane Integrity loss of the
mitochondrial membrane potential and
ultimately de cell
death um our lab as we've mentioned
utilizes the vm3 model of medesthetic
cancer that was developed in Dr Thomas
C's lab uh it's derived from a
spontaneous brain tumor with exhibits
GBM pathology uh it's syic with the vmdk
background allowing us to use amuno
competent animals um upon both upon
subcutaneous injection uh we see R rapid
systemic metastasis to a number of major
organ
systems um and these cells have been
transfected with firefly luciferase
which allows for the invivo detection of
tumor
growth um we show uh with uh 4-Hour
treatment of DCA at increasing
concentrations you see a loss of
phosphorated pdh uh this is we also see
um fallowing 24-hour treatment in
culture the uh a reduction in lactate
export suggestive of an increase in
glucose oxidation uh further evidence of
that is an increase in mitosox red
fluoresence which is an indicator of
superoxide production oops excuse me we
see uh that's concentration dependent we
see as a increased concentration of DCA
we see a significant um increase in
super super
oxide this also
corresponds um with alterations to the
mondal membrane um potential utilizing
tetramethyl rodamine which is an
indicator of membrane potential we see
at low Millar concentrations slight
hyperpolarization uh suggestive of
increased flux to the electron transport
chain however as we increase the
concentration of VCA we see a complete
depolarization of uh the
membrane and loss of
fluoresence um this is associated with a
concentration dependent increase in
cytotoxicity with DCA um looking at
amuno fluoresence for cytochrome c um at
a 12-hour treatment time Point using
just PBS we see in our control cells um
diffuse uh fluoresence uh and diffuse
localization of cyto C which is
indicative of a healthy uh
[Music]
monondach indicative of cell
death um additionally this cytotoxicity
is
modulated excuse me uh with through uh
addition of the antioxidant and uh and
andal cysteine excuse me where we see
ablation of this increase in cell death
with DCA treatment and we see a further
enhancement of cytotoxicity with the
addition of
BSO uh moving into the animal model uh
we show with a 250 milligram per
kilogram dose of DCA uh about a 79%
increase in survival over our
controls um we see this is associated
with a reduction in tumor burden 3 weeks
post injection compared to our controls
where we see systemic metastasis
throughout the animal um our DCA treated
animals only show uh tumor burden at the
S side of in
injection this is a we also see looking
at blood markers uh we see a significant
reduction in blood lactate at one week
after one week treatment um we also see
a significant reduction of blood glucose
at that one
week um as I mentioned DCA is being uh
studied clinically as an adant to a
number of chemotherapies our lab is
interested in identifying a potential
combination uh an agent to combine with
DCA that is more non-toxic than
traditional chemotherapy and we have
settled on Metformin which many most of
you are well aware is a firstline
therapy for type 2 diabetes metform
increases insulin sensitivity uh through
the reduction in systemic glucose and
Insulin it also promotes insulin
receptor function uh it inhibits hepatic
gluconeogenesis uh it reduces
inflammation through inhibition of the
NF Capa B pathway sub subsequently
leading to a decrease in uh Isle 1 six
and tnf levels additionally metformin is
uh under consideration as a therapy in
uh PCOS uh for its ability to reduce IC
estrogen metformin enters the cell
through the organic cation transporter
and because of its positive charge
preferentially accumulates within the
mitochondria um in 2000 oen at all uh
produced a paper in which they showed
that metformin inhibits complex one um a
number of other groups have been able to
repeat these findings as including the
chandel group in
Northwestern um and we show evidence
suggesting this is the case in which we
see at low micromolar concentrations
than metformin after 1 hour treatment we
see uh an increase in uh super oxide
production um we believe is indicative
of a loss of efficient Etc activity um
however if you increase this
concentration we see a significant
reduction in in Ross production um uh
potentially indicating a compensatory
mechanism again we look at me monoch
condrieu with low micromolar
concentration we see a slight
hyperpolarization again potentially
indicating increased flux to the
electron transport chain um however we
see a gradual depolarization as we
increase the concentration
um as Dr champ mentioned metformin is
well known for its ability to activate
amyas uh the inhibition of complex one
likely leads to a reduction in ATP
production subse subsequently you get an
increase in the ammp to ATP ratio which
is sensed by amp kinas allowing it to be
phosphorated by
lkb1 um and it's leading to its
activation uh activated amyas promotes
glycolysis fatty a acid oxidation and
also inhibition of mtor this ultimately
leads to diminished proliferation and
tumor growth um which is something we
show in culture where over uh we see
with 1 M metformin uh a blunting of uh
bm3
proliferation in the presence of
abundant glucose uh this
compensatory activation of ampas leads
to Restoration of ATP levels as well as
abundant lactate production uh which is
something we also show uh following
24-hour treatment we see a significant
increase in the amount of lactate in
culture however unlike with DCA we do
not see any uh cytotoxicity with
metformin
treatment uh moving again back into our
animal model uh with a 250 milligram per
kilogram dose of Metformin we see a uh
100% increase or we double the survival
time of our animals compared to control
this is again associated with a
reduction in Tor burden at 3
weeks and looking at our blood markers
we see a slight increase towards uh
lactate or increase in blood lactate uh
which is kind of follows with what with
metformin's mechanis mechanism of action
and we also see the Hallmark reduction
in blood
glucose um moving into uh our my data
looking at the
combination we show that DCA uh
partially um blunts this significant
increase in lactate production over
controls um as well as uh
further enhancement of oxidative stress
with the combination compared to both
agents
Alone um this corresponds with uh
metform an enhancement of DC a
cytotoxicity however we do not see uh
this enhancement when we combine DCA
with ampy activator iar suggesting that
any sort of um enhancement of DCA
activity is likely independent of the
activation of amp
kyes um as such as we increase the
concentration of Metformin we further
enhance DCA
cytotoxicity um unfortunately to this
point we have not been able to show a
further enhancement of survival with a
combination of our agents um we still
see a sign rather significant increase
in survival uh it just doesn't differ
from single treatments however we still
we with the combination see a reduction
um a slight reduction in blood lactate
at one week and again we see this
reduction in blood
glucose um in summary uh there's
definitely efficacy in targeting cancer
metabolism both dietary which is the
focus of this meaning as well as uh
potential small molecule Inhibitors uh
cancer is certainly vulnerable to
perturbations and redox balance um and
we have shown that DCA induces oxidative
stress and bm3 cell death and that meant
Forman enhances DCA cot toxicity
possibly through diminishing uh
efficiency of the electron transport
chain I certainly would like to thank my
mentor Dr Di austino and the rest of our
lab as well as our support ation and I'd
be happy to take any questions if you
have
[Applause]
them I I I don't want to be too critical
but have you seen the aio's U clinical
trial just failed and their stocks are
down they were I looked once you
mentioned that yesterday and I took a
look uh but they're still technically
recruiting for a number of other trials
I'm just trying to understand what what
kind of uh um and I don't want to be
critical I mean I'm totally in this idea
but what a GE is doing is just some kind
of a
genomic bismo Gizmo I mean truly uh this
uh isoc hydrogen is the gene
itself is not responsible for the
Metabolic Effect that's what the
clinical those animal models are
probably fantastic but the truth is you
have to approach this data in a very
critical sense because obviously these
drug failures targeted drug failures
they are actually now countless almost
they actually that's what we see
consistently and you need to um kind of
find some kind of a common ground what
is metabolic and what is genomic
genic is probably not going to be
effective as as we saw so many failures
the other question
is the LA dehydrogen it's the enzyme it
has itself has such a low control
coefficient that uh it's
like5 uh it's it's it's actually one of
the least control you know it's the
least rting enzymes in glycosis why is
it a good Dr
I mean you need to talk to bikers before
you you get into these trials because
that's how you set yourself up to
clinical failure which just showed so
you know impressive uh I've certainly
not advocating for their their drug uh I
simply was just highlighting
the a few of the small molecule
Inhibitors that are being developed um
and I myself am not looking at LDH is a
drug Target
um
sorry you had mentioned T Alpha I 6 and
i1 are reduced by metform m those are
all main soons associated with CIA have
you seen anything with methin and any
wasting or inflammatory treatment um
most of the studies that are have been P
or most of the literature that's been
published on that foran is mostly um
looking at its effect in reducing um
incidents in type 2 diabetic patients in
regards to a number of uh um cancers and
specifically I haven't seen anything
looking at the effect of Metformin on
Kia um maybe this is a stupid question
but if if a lot of people in this room
believe including myself
that cancer cells have faulty
mitochondria what's the mechanism by
causing mitochondrial
dysfunction would improve alcol or
mitochondrial toxin uh so um I
myself uh believe that there is monoc
condal dysfunction um within cancer but
I don't believe that it's complete l a
lack of mitochondrial function obviously
you I don't believe you would see the
activation of amp kinas um and cancer
cells with the with metformin treatment
if there wasn't some
basil um electron transport otherwise
there wouldn't be an effect a further
effect on ATP levels in order to
activate the enzyme um I certainly think
that
metformin uh efficacy will be dependent
on the extent of mitochondrial
dysfunction within a particular cancer
um but I think that there is still some
basil activity though it's certainly not
anywhere near a normal
cell